+++
title = "C# 4.0"
date = "2008-10-31"
draft = false
tags = ["c#"]
+++

<p>
As most people would know PDC is on at the moment over in the US and as usual Microsoft is showing their bag-o-tricks about what they are working on.
</p>
<p>
With PDC we saw a CTP release of Visual Studio 2010, and with this brings the .NET 4.0 framework and the next incantation of the C# language, C# 4.0.
</p>
<p>
I recently watched a screen cast session from PDC on the future of the C# language (<a href="http://channel9.msdn.com/pdc2008/TL16/" target="_blank">link here</a>), a session run by Anders Hejlsberg who is an excellent authority in the area of programming language design.<br>
I strongly recommend that you watch the session <em>if you are interested in where C# is going as a language</em>. Be aware it's a 70 minute session and pretty full-on in some parts.
</p>
<p>
So what are the new features coming with C# 4.0?
</p>
<p>
<strong>The Dynamic keyword</strong>
</p>
<p>
Anyone who's done a lot of work with C# 3.0, particularly with hard-core Lambda shouldn't be surprised by this move. C# is getting more dynamic programming features built into it, through the use of a <strong>dynamic</strong> keyword. <a href="http://www.codethinked.com/" target="_blank">Justin Etheredge</a>  has done two <a href="http://www.codethinked.com/post/2008/10/28/C-40-New-Features-Part-1-dynamic-keyword.aspx" target="_blank">good</a> <a href="http://www.codethinked.com/post/2008/10/28/C-40-New-Features-Part-11-dynamic-keyword-second-look.aspx" target="_blank"> posts</a> which look at the dynamic keywork and how it can be used. Anders also has a good demo in the screencast.
</p>
<p>
For me it's a little too early to have much of an opinion on this feature, I'm definately in two minds over it. On one side I really like the ability C# is going to have to tie straight into Ruby or Python or JavaScript with next to no changes to the code, but on the flip side is brings in a greater chance of errors.
</p>
<p>
ASP.NET developers are familiar with dynamic languages in the form of JavaScript, and any ASP.NET developer who's done a lot of JavaScript will tell you just how much of a pain in the arse it can be to debug. Because there's no compiler we don't know until run-time that there's a problem. Additionally intellisense suffers in a dynamic world vs a static one.<br>
And that's something I noticed from Anders talk, that when we're using the dynamic keyword in C# we loose the intellisense capabilities.
</p>
<p>
Until I have a chance to actually play with it in practical scenarios I'm not going to know whether it's really a useful idea at the moment.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Named and default parameters</strong>
</p>
<p>
What can be said about this other than "about fucking time!". Essentially this means that when defining method stubs parameters can be given a default value so they are optional in use. No more writing stacks of overloads to cater for every scenario of missing parameters, now it's just a single method with the defaults flagged appropriately.
</p>
<p>
Named parameters are also really nice, and to me it feels a lot like JSON parametering on methods in JavaScript. Just define the parameters to pass in and problem solved.
</p>
<p>
Both of these are to a certain extent syntactic sugar. It'll be interesting to see just what the compiler generates at an IL level to see what kind of performance hit may be resulted from this.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Co and Contra variants</strong>
</p>
<p>
This is definitely an interesting concept and something that I'm still getting my head around. For that reason I wont go into it here but watch the screen cast for more information.
</p>
<p>
From what I'm understanding of it they are going to be useful and it'll bring another level of power on top of the already awesome Generics framework.
</p>
<p>
<strong>Improved COM interop</strong>
</p>
<p>
Ok, so not really a commonly used feature of ASP.NET but the improved COM support (some-what as a side effect of default parameters) does mean that when coding against COM, like the Office interop, will be a whole lot nicer and a whole lot more viable.
</p>
<p>
<strong>C# post-4.0</strong>
</p>
<p>
So the last bit of the screen cast is Anders talking about what they are looking at with C# post version 4 and what he talks about is the compiler and it's ultimate role in the language.
</p>
<p>
Anyone who reads Bart de Smet's blog will have seen he did a Channel9 video recently (and if you didn't watch it you should!) where he talked about something Anders demos. It's the concept of the C# compiler as a service. This means that you can dynamically generate C# code which is then passed to the compiler and executed on the fly.
</p>
<p>
If you're not really sure what this means, check out the program LinqPad (I blogged on it last month), LINQPad opens up the compiler in a similar way, making it something that you can write code and pass to, rather than having to write code, make a DLL and execute.
</p>
<p>
Compiler as a Service is a very cool concept and really opens up the ability to generate code on the fly. Less reliance on CodeDom and System.Reflection is a great idea (as I can attest to from my work on the UIL!).
</p>
<p>
&nbsp;
</p>
<p>
The C# future definitely looks like a bright one. C# 4.0 doesn't seem to quite be the 'knock your socks off' release that C# 3.0 was but it's a move in the right direction and a very interesting one for sure. 
</p>