+++
title = "LINQPad"
date = "2008-09-25"
draft = false
tags = ["linqpad"]
+++

<p>
I'm sure that a lot of people have played with <a href="http://www.linqpad.net/" target="_blank" title="LINQPad">LINQPad</a> and if you haven't I strongly suggest you do.
</p>
<p>
In short LINQPad is a C#, VB &amp; SQL code snippet tester.
</p>
<p>
A lot of people first started playing with LINQPad when it was initially released as it is a great tool to get starting with LINQ to SQL, it allowed you to connect to a database and then start writing LINQ queries and view their execusion along with their generated SQL.
</p>
<p>
It's the best way to test queries as you don't need to do the standard "create project, add DBML, write query and debug".
</p>
<p>
I've used it quite a lot since its release but never really got into what it can do. Today I started playing with it in a bit more depth and found that it is <em>fantastically</em> powerful!<br>
First off theres the "Statement(s)" mode, this is essentially a mini Visual Studio, here you can write your standard C# or your VB exactly as you would in VS and then execute it, dumping it out to the console.
</p>
<p>
That's right, you can create objects, read/ write properties, build collections, basically anything you could do with a standard console application!
</p>
<p>
It also has the ability to import <strong>any</strong> DLL you want (well effectiveness will vary, don't expect System.Web to be <em>that useful</em>!). This allows you to bring in your own extension methods, external ORMs, etc.
</p>
<p>
I came across this video here: <a href="http://oreilly.com/pub/e/909" target="_blank">http://oreilly.com/pub/e/909</a>  which is a webcast involving Joseph Albahari who is the developer of LINQPad. Its long (42 minutes) but definitely worth a watch. 
</p>